---
layout: default
title: Update Mechanism
permalink: /cardano/update-mechanism/
group: cardano
visible: true
language: en
---
<!-- Reviewed at a6a1cdf72c7e167a13f500c0679c01fe4cfa0ca8 -->
<!-- Updated at 6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83 -->

# Update Research Overview

In the Update Mechanism research, we have managed to propose an update system
that is capable of producing painless and almost seamless software updates as
well as providing stakeholders with an option to vote for hard forks
(backwards-incompatible protocol updates) without the necessity to introduce any
non-protocol-level tools.

We propose to use stake for voting for soft and hard forks.

## Update System Model

For CSL, we decided to add some support for protocol updates at the protocol
layer itself. It introduces some overhead to blockchain processing, but has
several important benefits:

1.  For each client implementing the protocol, its latest version from
    blockchain is known.
2.  There is no central entity responsible for maintaining or distributing
    updates, any such update is proposed under implicit or explicit agreement of
    the majority of stake and then distributed in a decentralized way.
3.  We do not rely upon clients updating the software on their PCs in time; this
    is done automatically, and updates are announced directly via the
    blockchain.
4.  If any security flaws are detected in some version of the CSL protocol or in
    some particular implementation, there would be a mechanism to distribute an
    update rapidly (and still under agreement of the majority of stake).

## Application Update: Sign and Announce

Here we consider ways to update the application securely. Protocol updates are a
separate issue which is covered in the relevant section of this document.

For an update to be applied, its proposal needs be approved first. Update
proposal can be approved if at least one of two agreements is reached:

1.  **Explicit agreement**: it has positive votes from majority of total stake
    (i. e. strictly greater than `50%`).
2.  **Implicit agreement**: it has positive votes from more stake than negative
    votes ﻿⁠⁠⁠and﻿⁠⁠⁠ it has been in blockchain for at least `U` slots.

This approach seems to fit naturally into the CSL model, as in a PoS
cryptocurrency every stakeholder is responsible for maintaining the system
proportionally to the relative size of their stake, and the blockchain is
maintained via consensus among stakeholders.

Software updates are a part of this maintenance process too, so the stakeholders
should agree on whether to consider this update trusted.

### Implicit Agreement

The fact that stakeholders are responsible for system updates does not restrict
us to a system where every single update requires a signature from the majority
of stake. We can introduce the concept of an **implicit agreement**.

An update has to have at least minimal bound (`updateProposalThd` in 
[configuration.yaml](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/e26ad11397c87ce8b00f2a26d5e237f54d6ea90a/lib/configuration.yaml).) 
of the stake signatures to be published on
the blockchain. It is not enough for stakeholders to sign the update — they
should vote either for or against it.

### Incorporation of Alternative Clients

IOHK will maintain a single official client. But there is also room for
third-party alternative clients maintained by the community. One requires enough
collected signatures from stakeholders to publish their system update, which may
be not an «update», but a different client developed from scratch, or a fork of
the official client. As long as this update has enough signatures from
stakeholders, the network considers it trusted, and it is updated via the same
mechanisms as the official client.

## Application Update: Deliver and Apply

А list of HTTP mirrors ran by IOHK shall be sufficient for a start.

In process of time, we plan to maintain a Bittorrent-based or Bittorrent-like
solution to distribute updates. In general, P2P update distribution is a crucial
business requirement due to legal concerns. It is to be decided which
Bittorrent-like solution particular we will use.

Also, it’s interesting to note that the update itself does not require a secure
and trusted channel to be used for delivery, as it is signed with some known in
advance and trusted key (or set of keys).

Application updates are prepared with
[bsdiff](https://github.com/mendsley/bsdiff) and applied either directly or via
an installer. We're considering migrating to
[courgette](http://dev.chromium.org/developers/design-documents/software-updates-courgette)
in the future.

## Protocol Update

First, we need to distinguish hard and soft protocol updates.

A soft fork proposes modifying blockchain consensus rules so that the new
version blocks are still compatible with old version clients. A hard fork is one
that doesn’t maintain backward compatibility with the previous version.

[BIP-99](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/ed283b05b332b85b6fd683be3a5d73fab6c15554/bip-0099.mediawiki)
provides excellent criteria to distinguish between these two fork types:

-   A **soft fork** introduces new rules, or restrictions, on blocks. That way,
    everything that was previously invalid remains invalid, while some blocks
    that would have been previously considered valid become invalid.
-   A **hard fork** is a fork that makes previously invalid blocks valid.

Soft forks have some deployment advantages like backward compatibility, and they
don't require everyone's consensus, as the stake majority of users can impose
the new rules. By contrast, hard forks require all users to upgrade.

In theory, a hard fork may lead to a situation when a network splits into two
parts, each maintaining a separate chain: one from the nodes that adopted the
latest system update, and another from the nodes that rejected to do that. This
means some blocks from the first part are considered invalid by the other part,
and vice versa.

We define **protocol version** as a tuple `(Maj, Min, Alt)`:

-   Major version (2 bytes): to be changed rarely, changes are not
    backward-compatible and would produce a hard fork.
-   Minor version (2 bytes): integer to be adjusted for each update.
    -   Changes should be backward-compatible in a sense that a block generated
        by the new version shall be somehow accepted by old version.
    -   A particular block may contain addresses of unknown type. For each case
        like this, a concise workaround should be found in order not to affect
        stability and correctness of the system.
-   Alt version (1 byte): integer to manage several simultaneous protocol update
    proposals.

The protocol version is to be announced in the application update, and is to be
put later into each block created by updated software.

A major version change triggers a hard fork in the future.

A minor version change notifies the network that the subsequent application
update modifies the protocol managed by a soft fork.

Alt version is a marker of new features. It allows independent developers to
introduce multiple changes to the protocol simultaneously. For example, if one
vendor decides to introduce feature X via a soft fork, and another proposes
feature Y (also via a soft fork), their software will be issuing blocks with
versions `a.b.X` and `a.b.Y`, which can coexist in the blockchain. However, only
one will eventually be adopted.

## Soft Fork Updates

There is a thin line between what we can do within a soft fork and what we
cannot:

1.  An old version of the client should always find recent blocks valid. (This
    is what
    [BIP-99](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/ed283b05b332b85b6fd683be3a5d73fab6c15554/bip-0099.mediawiki)
    calls "everything invalid remains invalid").
2.  Some blocks issued by an old version of the client may be considered invalid
    by a newer version.

Obviously, imposing rule 2 as it is may cause the network to be split into two
parts: a stakeholder with a stake large enough could update and maintain their
own chain, rejecting blocks from others, but others would be still able to
maintain their chain, rejecting blocks from this stakeholder (since he does not
have a majority of stake, and therefore cannot catch up with the rest of the
crowd, so his chain is shorter). A simple resolution rule could go like this: if
95% of the latest 2016 blocks have a newer block version, the blocks with the
older version are rejected.

**NOTE**: **block version** here and later has the same meaning as the
**protocol version**.

It may seem unclear why we would like to make some block version invalid at some
moment. The key insight here is that a new feature is actually a restriction on
what we had had previously. For example, currently we have plain old
transactions which may contain either PublicKey-based addresses or Script-based
ones. Then at some point we decide to include a third address type (no matter
what its purpose is). Which strategy do we need for verifying a block with a
transaction with an address of unknown type? Obviously the only option is not
verifying this address.

Then imagine somebody proposing a transaction to this address, possibly doing
that with an intention to secure funds from being spent until some conditions
are met — and then watching them being spent in some other transaction in a
block with version 1. This is the point. We cannot make use of a restriction
without waiting for the network to start assuming the old version to be
deprecated (since we can only start rejecting blocks when their version is
deprecated).

We also cannot bluntly accept all blocks with a version that is higher than the
one currently adopted, since in our implementation every block has a special field
which is used for storing auxiliary information. An attacker can claim she uses a
higher version of the protocol and generate a block whose `attributes` are polluted
with meaningless keys. If we accept it, it will bloat the blockchain.

This is the motivation for the logic described below.

In our implementation, a block version can exist in the following states:

-   **Adopted**, when the soft fork resolution rule (see below) for a confirmed
    block version is triggered.
-   **Confirmed**, when there is an update proposal that contains a confirmed
    version of the software and this block version. Note that "confirmed version
    of the software" is a technical term defined
    [elsewhere](/cardano/update-mechanism/#soft-fork-updates). If there are
    multiple block versions where corresponding software is confirmed, but these
    versions aren't adopted, we call them **competing**. For instance, there
    might be versions `2.0.0`, `2.0.1`, `1.2.0`, `1.2.1`, `1.1.1` and `1.1.2`,
    with the last adopted version being `1.1.3`. In this case the versions that
    are competing are `2.0.0`, `2.0.1`, `1.2.0` and `1.2.1`. The older versions
    `1.1.1` and `1.1.2` aren't competing, because `1.1.3` is already adopted.
-   Everything else. For example, a new block version is proposed, but the
    software version isn't confirmed yet. There is no special name for this
    state.

The soft fork resolution rule works as follows:

-   Informally, a block version becomes *adopted* when a certain percentage of
    stake (75% in the current implementation, but this may be different in the
    mainnet) creates a block with version `X`.
-   Formally, we do the following. First, recall that by design, our system does
    not allow rollbacks of blockchain deeper than a certain fixed global
    threshold `k`, which allows to define *stable* stake for each stakeholder as
    their stake `k` blocks ago. When we process genesis block for epoch `e`, we
    compute the stable stake of all leaders of all slots from the very beginning
    of the network's existence. For each block with version `X` that is
    currently *competing*, we take all created *stable* blocks with version `X`,
    take set of all leaders of these blocks and accumulate their stakes. If one
    of versions has ≥ 75%, it gets *adopted*. If more than one version has ≥
    75%, we take one of them deterministically.

Note that adopted block version can't be changed during epoch (only between
epochs), so all blocks in an epoch are verified according to the same rules
(because rules are defined by adopted block version). But it's wrong to assume
that *all* blocks in an epoch have the same block version. After block version
is adopted, another block version can become competing and some nodes may create
blocks with this new version.

So, gathering everything up:

1.  Once the update is confirmed, the protocol version (say `0.5.0`) can be
    used.
2.  Behavior of nodes that *have* been updated (i.e. can issue and validate
    blocks with the newer version):
    1.  Before the soft fork is resolved (i.e. before the resolution rule is
        triggered), issue blocks with the new version `0.5.0`, but do not
        include any new `attributes` (if there are any). Treat and validate
        blocks of version `0.5.0` as blocks of version `0.4.0`.
    2.  Once the soft fork is resolved, issue and validate blocks per version
        `0.5.0`, including the new `attributes`.
3.  Behavior of nodes that *have not* been updated (i.e. cannot issue and
    validate blocks with the newer version):
    1.  Before the soft fork is resolved, issue and validate blocks per version
        `0.4.0`. Among other things, a block is not accepted if it contains
        unknown `attributes`.
    2.  Once the soft fork is resolved, start accepting all blocks with version
        `0.5.0`, including the ones with unknown `attributes`. Keep validating
        them as version `0.4.0`.

## Hard Fork Updates

Hard forks are resolved using modified proof of burn. As it is not implemented
yet, we omit this section from this document and will publish it as a separate
document.
