## Metadata proxy servers

Wallets do not retrieve metadata from each stake pool at every individual URL, as this could lead to malicious exploitation. For instance, third parties could slow down wallet communication by intentionally delaying the server's response time. To avoid this scenario, metadata uses proxy servers that query the URL included in the registration certificate, and cache the metadata using the pool's sks as key. Wallets will simply query these proxy servers to retrieve the metadata for the pools it needs to display, instead of sending a request to each of the pool’s metadata URLs. If the content hash listed on the certificate does not match the content hash of the cached metadata, the cache will be invalidated.

Proxy servers provide an additional level of security by filtering malicious entries. For example, it is possible to embed malicious content in the metadata, typically in the link to the stake pool’s homepage. If a pool hosts dangerous or illegal content, maintainers of a metadata proxy server can filter that entry and not provide it to wallets. This is a clear advantage over writing the metadata directly to the chain, where there would be no way to protect wallet users from visiting malicious sites directly from their wallet.

While proxy servers do offer effective protection against malicious interference, they could become a point of centralisation. To avoid this, we will provide third parties (stake pools, community members, etc.) with code and binaries so they can run their own proxy servers and prevent centralization.
