---
layout: default
title: P2P Layer
permalink: /technical/protocols/p2p/
group: technical-protocols
language: en
---
<!-- Reviewed at ef835a2334888eda7384da707c4077a8b576b192 -->

# P2P Layer

To start communicating with other nodes, a node has to join the network. To do
this, the node has to know some other node that already participates in the
protocol; this node is called a *bootstrap node*.

After connecting to the bootstrap node, we receive a list of peers which we'll
use for network communication. Those peers are called *neighbors*. The list of
neighbors should be maintained in such a way that these nodes are online and any
node from the network can receive our messages. Moreover, messages should be
delivered efficiently.

To achieve this, Cardano SL uses the *Kademlia* DHT protocol. Even though
Kademlia provides more features, we only use it as a method of peer discovery.

## Overview of Kademlia Protocol

*See also: the [P2P Network section](/technical#p2p-network) of the technical
overview.*

In Kademlia, every node is associated with a 32-byte ID (see [ID
structure](#id-structure) for more details). These IDs are used to identify
nodes without having to refer to their network addresses. The keys used to
store values in Kademlia are also 32-byte identifiers.

Kademlia uses the XOR metric to define the distance between nodes. Key-value
pairs are stored in nodes with IDs that are “close” to the keys. This distance
is also used to efficiently locate a node with the given ID.

At start, a bootstrap node should be provided to Kademlia in order to join the
network. The address of this node can be hardcoded in the implementation or
chosen by the user. Later, the node will attempt to find more peers by querying
its neighbors (from the initial list of peers sent by the bootstrap node). A
node sends messages to its peers, which resend messages to their peers close to
the needed ID/key. The list of known peers is preserved between launches.

Here and later, by *address* we mean tuple `(Host, Port, ID)`, while *network
address* denotes just the pair `(Host, Port)`.

Kademlia uses the UDP protocol for transmitting messages.

To learn more about how Kademlia is implemented, please refer to the paper
[Kademlia: a Peer-to-peer Information System Based on the XOR
Metric](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/~petar/papers/maymounkov-kademlia-lncs.pdf).

## Messages Used in Kademlia

Every message is represented as a binary string with the maximum length of [1200
bytes](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Config.hs#L61)
(so that it wouldn't exceed IPv6 datagram size). A special case is
`RETURN_NODES`: if it exceeds 1200 bytes, the node list is split into several
messages. The number of messages is represented with a single byte. Please see
[`serialize`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Protocol.hs#L41)
function for more details.

### IDs, Keys and Values

IDs and keys in Kademlia are represented with the same structure called
[`HashId`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/HashNodeId.hs#L32):

<a name="id-structure"></a>

| Field size | Description                                        |
|------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| 18         | *Hash* - *PBKDF2* key generated from *Nonce*       |
| 14         | *Nonce* - an arbitrary 14-bytes long binary string |

Please see [Addressing](#addressing) section for more details.

Cardano SL do not use Kademlia as key-value storage. Thus we just use empty
strings as values.

### PING

Check if a peer is still accessible. After sending this message, the node would
expect to receive a *PONG* message as the reply. Kademlia pings every peer
periodically to maintain a correct peer list.

| Field size | Value | Description                            |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| 1          | 0     | 1-byte value to determine message type |
| 32         |       | ID of our node                         |

### PONG

Used as a reply to `PING` messages.

| Field size | Value | Description                            |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| 1          | 1     | 1-byte value to determine message type |
| 32         |       | ID of our node                         |

### STORE

Store given value in Kademlia. This message is disabled and would be ignored by
nodes.

| Field size | Value | Description                            |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| 1          | 2     | 1-byte value to determine message type |
| 32         |       | ID of our node                         |
| 32         |       | Key                                    |
| 0          |       | Value (empty string in Cardano SL)     |

### FIND\_NODE

Request network address of node with given ID. After sending this message the
node would expect to receive a `RETURN_NODES` message with a list of nodes
closest to the requested one (including the requested node itself).

| Field size | Value | Description                            |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| 1          | 3     | 1-byte value to determine message type |
| 32         |       | ID of our node                         |
| 32         |       | ID of node we are looking for          |

### RETURN\_NODES

Send network addresses of some nodes in reply to `FIND_NODE` of `FIND_VALUE`.
Answer is split into several messages because list of nodes can exceed IPv6
datagram size.

First, let's describe binary representation of single *peer*:

| Field size | Value | Description                                       |
|------------|-------|---------------------------------------------------|
| 32         |       | Peer ID                                           |
| 1-255      |       | Peer host name                                    |
| 1          | 32    | Ascii code of " " to separate host name from port |
| 2          |       | Peer port                                         |

Now, let's describe binary representation of `RETURN_NODES` message:

|   Field size | Value | Description                                                                                   |
|--------------|-------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|            1 | 4     | 1-byte value to determine message type                                                        |
|           32 |       | ID of our node                                                                                |
|            1 |       | Total number of `RETURN_NODES` messages sent as answer to this request                        |
|           32 |       | ID of node that requested nodes                                                               |
| at most 1136 |       | Several peers close to the requested ID (at most 1136 bytes to not exceed IPv6 datagram size) |

### FIND\_VALUE

Behaves in the same way as `FIND_NODE`, except that it can also receive a
`RETURN_VALUE` response if the lookup was successful. Currently it's only used
in Cardano SL for finding peers. When the node starts working, it generates a
random key and asks Kademlia to find it; this search always fails, but it lets
the node discover some initial peer addresses.

| Field size | Value | Description                            |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| 1          | 5     | 1-byte value to determine message type |
| 32         |       | ID of our node                         |
| 32         |       | Key we are looking for                 |

### RETURN\_VALUE

A reply to a `STORE` request. This message is not used in Cardano SL because it
does not store any values in Kademlia.

| Field size | Value | Description                            |
|------------|-------|----------------------------------------|
| 1          | 6     | 1-byte value to determine message type |
| 32         |       | ID of our node                         |
| 32         |       | ID of node that requested value        |
| 0          |       | Value (empty string in Cardano SL)     |

## Security

Since Kademlia is a protocol for open P2P networks, it had to be modified in
several other ways to become reasonably secure.

### Possible Attacks

An **eclipse attack** is a situation when a node is surrounded by adversary
nodes.

In Kademlia, eclipse attacks (targeted at the particular participant of the
network) are hard to perform, but possible. First, launch a hundred nodes with
node IDs close to target node ID. These nodes would fill the node's lowest
`k`-buckets (which are expected to be empty, at a first sight), then perform a
DDoS attack on nodes from target's `k`-buckets (it's possible to determine those
nodes if network's topology haven't changed much since the node was started).
After a successful DDoS attack, the node's remaining neighbors would be
adversary agents.

Please note that Kademlia’s structure implies that launching nodes close to the
target is not enough to eclipse it. Node lists are stored by node in `k`-buckets
(the i-th bucket contains no more than `k` nodes with relative distance
`2^i-1 < d < 2^i`), and new nodes are added to corresponding buckets only if
these buckets are not already full. Kademlia prefers nodes that have been in
lists for a long time and were recently seen alive. Without getting some nodes
down, it's impossible to eclipse a node.

This attack is tricky and unlikely to happen in practice. The
[Addressing](#addressing) modification makes it even harder.

A **100500 attack** is an attack that launches significantly more nodes than the
amount of nodes in the current P2P network, either in order to eclipse some
nodes or to deny service by flooding the network. The attack wouldn't cause any
problems for old nodes (not counting possible network overhead), because old
nodes preserve their routes. But when a new node joins the network, it would get
eclipsed (isolated in an adversarial subnet), because old honest nodes won't add
it to their buckets (as these buckets are already filled by other nodes), and
the new node would be known to adversaries only.

Defending against 100500 attacks remains an open problem. For now, we're going
to make them practically infeasible with a sophisticated ban system / adversary
detection.

### Addressing

We use so-called `HashId`s as node IDs. Since it [contains](#id-structure) a
hash, assigning yourself an arbitrary ID is impossible, and this means that a
100500 attack is the only way to perform an eclipse attack.

#### Implementation Notes

`HashId` is a binary string with a fixed length (32 bytes) formed like this:

    +---------------+------------+
    |    Hashing    |    Nonce   |
    +---------------+------------+

    |   18 bytes    |  14 bytes  |

where:

-   `Nonce` is just random 14 bytes (from the system source of entropy),
-   `Hashing` is hashing data.

Hashing data is generated based on `DerivingKey` and `Salt`, where:

-   `DerivingKey` is generated by PBKDF2 ([Password Based Key Derivation
    Function 2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PBKDF2)).
-   `Salt` is a SHA-512 digest from `Nonce` mentioned above.

For `DerivingKey` generation we use these arguments:

-   `prfPassword` - PRF (pseudorandom function) for PBKDF2 using HMAC
    ([Hash-based Message Authentication
    Code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash-based_message_authentication_code))
    with SHA-256 algorithm.
-   `parameters` - PBKDF2 parameters: 500 iterations, for 32 bytes as a result
    output.
-   `Nonce` mentioned above - as `password`.
-   `Salt` mentioned above - as `salt`.

### Routing Data Anti-forging

In Kademlia, a node requests a list of peers from its neighbors and accepts the
first message it receives. An adversary may forge those replies, providing
addresses of adversary nodes as closest nodes to given ID. To overcome this
issue, we make nodes wait for some period to gather as many replies as possible,
and after that, the replies get merged and the node selects `k` closest nodes from
the resulting set. This way, an adversary would have to eclipse a node in order
to forge the list of peers it receives.

#### Implementation Notes

To implement this idea, we just add `k` neighbors nodes closest to the
destination at the beginning of each
[lookup](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L48)
(`lookup` is a function used by `FIND_NODE` or `FIND_VALUE` to find `k` nodes
closest to the given ID) to the
[pending](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L243)
set. When we receive a `RETURN_NODES` message, we update
[known](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L242)
list to make it contain `k` nodes currently known that are closest to the
destination ID. This loop ends when no *pending* nodes are left. We do not
introduce any specific period to collect neighbors replies. If any neighbors do
not send us `RETURN_NODES` reply, we receive `Timeout` signal and this neighbor
is handled by
[`waitForReply`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L286) function.

See also
[`continueLookup`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L371) function.
It is the place where *pending* and *known* fields are updated, so this is where
the core logic of this enhancement is located.

### Routing Tables Sharing

When a node has just joined the network, it requests a list of neighbors (set of
nodes closest to it). We have modified Kademlia to include some extra nodes into
this list; specifically, now we pick some random nodes along with neighbors and
return them. This gives the node additional knowledge to recover in case it's
surrounded with adversary nodes.

#### Implementation Notes

There is the function
[`findClosest`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Tree.hs#L195)
in our Kademlia implementation which finds `k` nodes closest to the given ID.
The function
[`pickupRandom`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Tree.hs#L180)
was added. This function picks up given number of random nodes from Kademlia
tree. The exact number of shared random nodes is specified through
[`routingSharingN`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Config.hs#L63) field from Kademlia config. This way, `RETURN_NODES` message
includes the results of `findClosest` and `pickupRandom` calls.

### Banning Nodes

We introduce a feature to ban nodes to Kademlia. We will use this to ban nodes
when we detect them to act maliciously.

#### Implementation Notes

There are three possible states for a node:

1.  `NoBan`,
2.  `BanTill`,
3.  `BanForever`.

Please see
[`BanState`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Instance.hs#L66) type. Values of this type are passed to
[`banNode`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Instance.hs#L165)
function.

`NoBan` is used to unban the already banned nodes. However, this action does
not insert this node back into tree structure, but makes possible for this
node to appear in peers again.

`BanTill` bans a node till some time (defined as a POSIX time).

`BanForever` bans a node forever.

The function `banNode` adds given node to the `banned` field of
[`KademliaState`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Instance.hs#L73)
type and deletes it from the tree.
The function [`isNodeBanned`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Instance.hs#L150)
checks if node is banned at the moment and deletes node from `banned` field if
it was unbanned, or if the ban expired.

How a banned node is treated:

-   We cannot use it as our initial peer to join the network. Please see
    [`joinNetwork`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L152) function.

-   We ignore all messages received from a banned node. Please see
    [`waitForReply`](https://github.com/serokell/kademlia/blob/7120bb4d28e708acd52dfd61d3dca7914fac7d7f/src/Network/Kademlia/Implementation.hs#L286) function.

-   We do not include this node to the tree, do not send any messages to it and
    do not include this node to the `RETURN_NODES` messages.
