---
layout: default
title: Glossary
permalink: /glossary/
group: base
language: en
---

<!-- Reviewed at d0d6c2fedefb642744a24b4b0a6d8d7ad11532f6 -->

# Glossary

## Ada

The name of our currency, named in honor of [Ada
Lovelace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace).

## Address

The unique identifier of a [node](#node). Please read about [Addresses in
Cardano SL](/cardano/addresses/) for more details.

## Balance

Please read about [Balance and Stake in Cardano SL](/cardano/balance-and-stake/)
for explanation.

## Block

A fundamental part of a [Ledger](#ledger). Please read about [Blocks in Cardano
SL](/technical/blocks/) for technical details.

## Blockchain

Please see [Ledger](#ledger).

## Cardano SL

Cardano SL (or Cardano Settlement Layer) is a decentralized cryptographic
currency designed and developed by [IOHK](https://iohk.io/team). Named in honor
of [Gerolamo Cardano](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerolamo_Cardano).

## Coin Tossing

A Coin Tossing is a protocol that allows two or more parties to obtain
a uniformly random value. We use Coin Tossing protocol as a base of [SSC](#ssc).
Please read [paper](#paper) (page 36) for more details about Coin Tossing.

## Consensus Algorithm

A way for a decentralized system to reach a consistent view on shared
collections of data. Cardano SL uses the [Ouroboros Consensus
Algorithm](/cardano/proof-of-stake/), which is an algorithm based on
[Proof of Stake](#proof-of-stake).

## Cryptocurrency

A computer system which uses cryptographic protocols to generate a ledger.
Please read about [Cryptocurrency Basics](/introduction/#cryptocurrency-basics)
for more details.

## Daedalus

Cardano SL wallet application. It provides a GUI for users, so they can access
their funds, send and receive transactions, etc. Please read about [Cardano SL
Wallet Frontend](/technical/wallet-frontend/) for more details.

## Decentralization

A notion of a computer system operating through interaction of independent
nodes. In case of maintaining a shared data collection such as a ledger, a
consensus is required for consistency and reliability of data.

## Epoch

A bigger period of time for which we know in advance who will have the right to
generate a block in each slot. Please read [paper](#paper) (page 3) for
technical details.

## Follow The Satoshi

A mechanism whereby stakeholders are selected at random to forge a new block in
the blockchain, with a proportional chance to get elected depending on their
amount of stake in the protocol.

## Guaranteed Output Delivery

Guaranteed output delivery is a mechanism that proves that the honest parties
are guaranteed to successfully complete the multiparty computation (MPC). We
use G.O.D. in [SSC](#ssc).

## Honest Majority

Honest majority is a situation when the number of honest participants is strictly
greater than the number of adversaries, i.e. at least 50% + 1. Honest majority 
is assumed by default.

## Kademlia

Please see [Peer Discovery](#peer-discovery).

## Leader Election

A process of picking who will generate blocks during the next epoch. Leaders are
elected with a probability proportional to their stake (see [Proof of
Stake](#proof-of-stake), [Follow the Satoshi](#follow-the-satoshi)).

## Ledger

A collection of data that keeps track of value assigned to individuals. Please
read [paper](#paper) (page 32) for technical details.

## Lovelace

Name of a smallest unit of our currency. Named in honor of [Ada
Lovelace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace).

## Minting

A process of a new block creation in [Proof of
Stake](/introduction/#proof-of-stake-and-minting) systems.

## Node

A computer program that participates in a decentralized protocol system. Please
read [High-level technical overview](/technical/#high-level-overview) for more
details.

## Paper

Official protocol report [Ouroboros: A Provably Secure Proof-of-Stake Blockchain
Protocol](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/889). Please notice that Cardano SL
implementation differs from the paper, [read about
differences](/cardano/differences/) for more details.

## Peer Discovery

A way how a node can find other nodes after running. Peer discovery we use is
based on Kademlia DHT. Please read [a Kademlia
paper](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/~petar/papers/maymounkov-kademlia-lncs.pdf)
for technical details.

## Plutus

Strictly typed pure functional programming language used for defining smart
contracts in Cardano. Please read about
[Plutus](/technical/plutus/introduction/) for more details.

## Proof of Stake

Ouroboros Proof of Stake algorithm is the most important part of the [protocol](#paper).
It defines the way [nodes](#node) reach consensus about the state of [ledger](#ledger).
Please read about [Ouroboros Proof of Stake Algorithm](/cardano/proof-of-stake/)
for more details.

## PVSS

PVSS (Publicly Verifiable Secret Sharing) is a cryptographic scheme we use in [SSC](#ssc).
Please read about [PVSS implementation in Cardano SL](/technical/pvss/) for more details.

## Richman

Stakeholder with stake enough for participation in some action. Particularly,
there are three kinds of such actions: randomness generation (for [slot leaders
elections process](/technical/leader-selection/)),
[heavyweight stake delegation](/technical/delegation/#heavyweight-delegation)
and voting for [update proposals](/cardano/update-mechanism/#application-update-sign-and-announce).

## Signing

A way to generate a proof of genuine authenticity of any kind of information we
use in [cryptocurrency](#cryptocurrency).

## Slot

A small period of physical time that is significantly larger than the expected
difference in clocks on different nodes. Please read [paper](#paper) (page 4) for
technical details.

## Slot Leader

A slot leader is a node which was elected to have a right to create a block in
the current slot. Please read [paper](#paper) (page 7) for technical details.

## SSC

SSC (Shared Seed Computation) is a part of [slot leader election](#leader-election)
process. This part is implemented as a [Coin Tossing](#coin-tossing) protocol with
[Guaranteed Output Delivery](#guaranteed-output-delivery). As a result of SSC we get
a randomness which will be used in [Follow The Satoshi](#follow-the-satoshi) mechanism.

## Stake

Please read about [Balance and Stake in Cardano SL](/cardano/balance-and-stake/)
for explanation.

## Stakeholder

A node with a positive stake.

## Transaction

The data that represents the act of transferring value. Please read about
[Transactions in Cardano SL](/cardano/transactions/) for more details.

## Transaction Fees

Please read about [Transaction Fees in Cardano SL](/cardano/transaction-fees/)
for explanation.
