---
layout: default
title: Cardano SL Updater
permalink: /technical/updater/
group: technical
visible: true
language: en
---
<!-- Reviewed at ac0126b2753f1f5ca6fbfb555783fbeb1aa141bd -->

<!-- Updated at 6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83 -->

# Cardano SL Updater Implementation Overview

Implementation of the update system can be found in the
[Pos.Update](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/tree/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update)
family of modules. The general approach to implementation is the same as in
other subsystems of CSL, such as Txp, Ssc and Delegation. The update system has
the global state, stored in the database. The global state can be unambiguously
derived from the information that is in the blockchain. The local state,
sometimes referred to as “mempool”, is stored in the memory. The mempool is used
for data transfer and inclusion of transferred data into blocks. The network
protocol (built with standard [Inv/Req/Data
pattern](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/tree/43a2d079a026b90ba860e79b5be52d1337e26c6f/infra/Pos/Communication/Relay))
is described in [Application-level
document](/technical/protocols/csl-application-level/) with the binary protocol
described in [Binary protocols
document](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/).

Currently, everything is ready to add hard fork functionality via software
update and then perform a hard fork as described in research section; soft forks
(or software updates) are fully implemented.

## Fields Updatable with a Soft Fork

An
[UpdateProposal](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/43a2d079a026b90ba860e79b5be52d1337e26c6f/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs#L110)
contains fields for changing some parameters used by Cardano SL (for instance,
slot duration). Specifically, `upBlockVersion` is used to signify that a
proposal performs such changes; if `upBlockVersion` is greater than the last
used block version, the changes from `upBlockVersionData` will be applied.

`upBlockVersionData` has the type
[BlockVersionData](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/fe5e6a377ab63c506173545fd4d8633cd1afbdc6/core/Pos/Core/Types.hs#L206).

Its fields are described below:

-   `bvdScriptVersion` – a script language version used to validate script
    transactions. If the proposal increases `upBlockVersion`, it must also
    increase `bvdScriptVersion` by 1 (and can't leave it unchanged).
-   `bvdSlotDuration` – slot duration (in milliseconds).
-   `bvdMaxBlockSize` – block size limit (in bytes). A proposal can't increase
    the block size limit more than twofold compared to the previous limit.
-   `bvdMaxHeaderSize` - block header size limit (in bytes).
-   `bvdMaxTxSize` – transaction size limit (in bytes, [currently
    4096](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/43a2d079a026b90ba860e79b5be52d1337e26c6f/core/constants.yaml#L17)),
    limits size of
    [TxAux](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/#transaction-auxilary)

The checks described above are made in
[verifyNextBVData](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/893e3c838bf847613313e8dbf04330176a788af4/update/Pos/Update/Poll/Logic/Base.hs#L232).

In addition, there are some fields that are unused right now, but will be used
in the future. Their meaning is briefly described below:

-   `bvdMpcThd` – eligibility threshold for MPC.
-   `bvdHeavyDelThd` – threshold for heavyweight delegation.
-   `bvdUpdateVoteThd` – portion of total stake necessary to vote for or against
    an update.
-   `bvdUpdateProposalThd` – portion of total stake such that block containing
    `UpdateProposal` must contain positive votes for this proposal from
    stakeholders owning at least this amount of stake.
-   `bvdUpdateImplicit` – number of slots after which an update is implicitly
    approved (unless it has more negative votes than positive).
-   `bvdUpdateSoftforkThd` – portion of total stake such that if total stake of
    issuers of blocks with some block version is bigger than this portion, this
    block version is adopted.

## Mempool Structure

[`MemPool`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/43a2d079a026b90ba860e79b5be52d1337e26c6f/update/Pos/Update/MemState/Types.hs#L29) consists of votes and proposals. Apart from that [`MemState`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/43a2d079a026b90ba860e79b5be52d1337e26c6f/update/Pos/Update/MemState/Types.hs#L39) contains
tip, slot and `PollModifier` corresponding to `MemPool` (and to current
`GState`, i. e. to application of `MemPool` to `GState`). No matter whether a
change in proposal state comes from the network/mempool, or from loading the
blockchain, `PollModifier` represents modification of global state which will be
made if one applies mempool.

### Updating the Mempool

As nodes deserialize [payloads of update system
messages](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/#update-system), they modify
mempool as implemented
[here](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/43a2d079a026b90ba860e79b5be52d1337e26c6f/update/Pos/Update/MemState/Functions.hs#L35).

`MemPool` is updated in three cases:

1.  **When a new proposal/vote is received**. In this case, one of the
    [process](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/763822c4fd906f36fa97b6b1f973d31d52342f3f/update/Pos/Update/Logic/Local.hs#L186)
    functions is called, which in turn calls
    [`verifyAndApplyUSPayload`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/dff5e00612c84af24964a98e5254602fa4f7fc17/update/Pos/Update/Poll/Logic/Apply.hs#L66)
    and then updates current `PollModifier` and `MemPool`.
2.  **When a new slot starts**. In this case some data in `MemPool` may become
    invalid. In fact, it happens only when epoch changes. That can happen
    because stable stake distribution changes and some votes may have not enough
    stake for inclusion. It's done in the
    [`processNewSlot`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/763822c4fd906f36fa97b6b1f973d31d52342f3f/update/Pos/Update/Logic/Local.hs#L283)
    function.
3.  **When `GState` is updated**. It is called
    [`usNormalize`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/763822c4fd906f36fa97b6b1f973d31d52342f3f/update/Pos/Update/Logic/Local.hs#L248).
    Some data may become invalid as a result of block(s) application or
    rollback. For instance, we have a proposal in memory, apply block with this
    proposal and it becomes invalid (because it's already in block). We should
    drop such proposals. Or we have a vote for proposal from some block, then
    rollback of this block happens and vote is no longer valid. It is
    implemented by applying all local data to empty state, ignoring all data
    which is no longer valid.

### Proposal and Votes Accumulation

To vote for a proposal, nodes should send their
[votes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/04dc8e4a640a62f0d82633f3a78ab3d8540fd5e6/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs#L255).
Proposals and votes are stored in mempool (even if proposals don't have enough
votes for inclusion into blocks, this way votes can be collected automatically)
or gathered from the blockchain in order to figure out which proposal is
adopted.

## Interaction With the Database

In order to verify update system data, we have to get this data from the global
state (database). To provide such interface, a well-documented type class
[`MonadPollRead`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/446444070ee09857603797a90af970fff215c8c5/update/Pos/Update/Poll/Class.hs#L29)
is presented. This type class is used not only for DB interaction, but also to
take mempool into account when the data received from the network are processed.
It is important that its implementation relies on functions found in
[`Pos.Update.DB`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/04dc8e4a640a62f0d82633f3a78ab3d8540fd5e6/update/Pos/Update/DB.hs) module.

## Core Types

Core types are mentioned in the [Binary Protocols](/technical/protocols/binary-protocols/)
document. Those types reflect the concepts from the research section in a straightforward way.
Please refer to the [core types
module](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/04dc8e4a640a62f0d82633f3a78ab3d8540fd5e6/update/Pos/Update/Core/Types.hs)
for more information.

## Update Proposal Approval

A very important part of implementation of the update mechanism is the part that
works with genesis blocks for epochs. This logic resides in
[`processGenesisBlock`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/6b5eda44e5942599a9781e5ad3f51eb820665b83/src/Pos/Update/Poll/Logic/Softfork.hs#L68) function.
The terminology related to this process is explained below.

### Threshold

Suppose there is a block version `X`. And there are blocks with version `X`
created in slots `S` (where `S` is a set of slots). If total relative stake of
leaders of all slots in `S` is ≥ `softforkResolutionThreshold` (referred to as
«threshold» in the code), then `X` becomes adopted. See the more detailed
description in [research overview](/cardano/update-mechanism/#soft-fork-updates).

### Proposal states

Update proposal can be in one of the states described below.

#### Undecided

It means that update proposal is contained in one of the blocks, but it doesn't
have `50%` votes for/against it (here `50%` means total stake of voters who are
for/against proposal relative to total stake of all stakeholders in system) and
implicit agreement rule hasn't been triggered yet.

<!-- TODO: **Important remark:** when we are talking about stake, we need to be clear about
which stake distribution we are talking about. For each epoch we know stable distribution
for this epoch. It used in leaders selection (follow-the-satoshi) and also in many other
cases. Stable distribution is distribution as it was ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠2k﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ slots before the end of epoch.
To calculate stake of votes for proposal ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠p﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ we use stake distribution as per epoch in
which ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠p﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ was added to blocks. I. e. distribution which was ﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠2k﻿⁠⁠⁠⁠ slots before the
end of that epoch. This ensures that nobody can transfer his funds to another address
and vote from that address to increase total stake of voters.

**Another important remark:** when we are talking about stake, it's also important to be
clear whether we consider delegated stake. I. e. if Alice delegated to Bob, do we consider
that Alice's funds belong to Bob or Alice? When we use stake for votes, we consider delegated
stake, i. e. we consider that Alice's funds belong to Bob. Note that here we consider
only heavyweight delegation. I hope it's covered in documentation, but I am not sure. -->

#### Approved

It means that proposal has more than `50%` votes for it or it was added to block
long ago (according to implicit agreement rule) and it has more positive votes
than negative (comparison by stake of course).

#### Rejected

A proposal is called **rejected** if that proposal has more than `50%` votes
against it or it was added to block long ago (according to implicit agreement
rule) and it has more negative votes than positive (again, comparison by stake).

#### Confirmed

An **approved** proposal is called **confirmed** if at least `k` blocks ago
proposal became **Approved**. At this point we can be sure that proposal won't
become **rejected**, because rollbacks with depth more than `k` aren't possible.

#### Discarded

A **rejected** proposal is called **discarded**, if at least `k` blocks ago that
proposal became **rejected**. At this point we can be sure that proposal won't
be approved, because rollbacks with depth more than `k` aren't possible.

## Download New Version

In the
[`Pos.Update.Download`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/04dc8e4a640a62f0d82633f3a78ab3d8540fd5e6/src/Pos/Update/Download.hs)
module, the following algorithms are implemented. Downloaded updates are applied
using a tool called
[`cardano-launcher`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/82ba83c3ffb670201b309ff47e3d0ab5f4a17455/src/launcher/Main.hs).

### Download Confirmed Update

To download a confirmed update, we extract the update hash from
[`ConfirmedProposalState`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/04dc8e4a640a62f0d82633f3a78ab3d8540fd5e6/update/Pos/Update/Poll/Types.hs#L114). It is extracted depending on whether or not we're
using an installer on given platform. If the update hash is extracted
successfully, the “Download Update by Hash” algorithm is invoked to download and
save the confirmed update.

### Download Update by Hash

To [download an update by hash](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/daa8b81785f38038187c45385c9a94510a5c3780/src/Pos/Update/Download.hs#L108), we loop through known update servers trying to
download the update with given hash using `httpLBS` from HTTP. It's simple: in
the end, we will either have the update completely downloaded or server list
exhausted and an error reported. URIs of the known update servers are defined
using `--update-server` argument of the `cardano-node` executable.
