## What is the Marlowe Playground
Marlowe is a domain-specific language that allows users to apply their domain expertise to create and manage financial contracts conveniently, without the steep learning curve associated with software development, blockchain, or smart contracts. Marlowe contracts are straightforward as they are optimized for financial transactions, development platforms, and ensure a fast track for financial service providers to build expertise in smart contracts and blockchain technology.

The [Marlowe Playground](https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/) is the medium for end-to-end financial smart contract development. It provides a means for developers to not only write smart contract code, but to also perform preliminary iterative design using simulations, ability to formally verify, and ability to test smart contracts. These capabilities, paired with a purpose-built DSL for finance ensures that the contracts are easy and straightforward to build, secure, verifiable, and rigorously tested. 

The playground is available to use so that you can develop, simulate, and test the process of writing smart contracts in a sandbox environment. Its purpose is to encourage all types of developers, even if you don’t have prior Haskell or Javascript experience, to build financial products. Marlowe is in the process of deployment on Cardano, however, the Marlowe Playground already provides an environment, where users can try out its functionality in advance of the full deployment. A set of [tutorials](https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/tutorial/index.html) is available that outlines example contracts and overview information on Marlowe and how contracts should be modelled. 
